

===== PAGE 1 =====
21 
Measurements of entrainment by axisymmetrical 
turbulent jets 
By F. P. RICOUt AND D. B. SPALDING 
Mechanical Engineering Dopartinent, Imperial College of Science 
and Technology, London, S.W. 7 
(Received 23 Sovember 1960) 
A new technique is described for measuring the axial mass flow rate in the 
turbulent jet formed when a gas is injected into a reservoir of stagnant air at 
uniform pressure. The jet is surrounded by a porous-walled cylindrical chamber, 
and air is injected through the wall until the pressure in the chamber is uniform 
and atmospheric, a condition which is taken to signify that the ‘entrainment 
appetite’ of the jet is satisfied. 
Measurements made with the apparatus have allowed the deduction of an 
entrainment law relating mass flow rate, jet momentum, axial distance and air 
density, regardless of the density of the injected gas, and including the effects 
of buoyancy. When the injected gas burns in the jet the entrainment rate is up 
to 30 yo lower than when it does not. 
The problem 1. Introduction 
Several accounts are available (e.g. Scklichting 1955; Pai 1954) of the turbulent 
jet which results from the injection of a fluid through a nozzle into a large 
reservoir in which a second fluid is at rest. In the present paper, attention is con- 
centrated on one property of the jet: the mass flow rate across a section at right 
angles to the jet axis. This quantity will be denoted by the symbol m; it may be 
related to the fluid velocity u in the axial direction, the fluid density p, and the 
radial distance y by 
m = /om 2n~ydy, (1) 
where the over bar denotes a time-mean. 
The mass flow rate m is known to increase with distance x from the nozzle. 
As a consequence, fluid from the surrounding reservoir is drawn radially inwards 
towards the jet across its conical surface; this process is known as entrainment. 
Entrainment is also important in many more practical situations; for example, 
it controls the flow patterns in combustion chambers and furnaces; it causes 
‘ fire-storms ’ around large conflagrations; and many mixing devices of the 
chemical industry rely on entrainment for their effectiveness. If such processes 
are to be understood and controlled, the quantitative laws which govern the 
rate of entrainment, i.e. the quantity dmldx, must be discovered. 
t Now at t,he Laboratoires de MBcanique des Fluidos, UniversitO do Grenoble. 

===== PAGE 2 =====
22 F. P. Ricou and D. B. Spalding 
Dimensional analysis may be employed to show that, when the fluid density 
is uniform, when the Reynolds number is high and when the distance x is much 
larger than the diameter of the orifice, m is proportional to x. More precisely, 
it may be demonstrated thst m 
where M stands for the excess momentum flux of the jet, p1 is the density of the 
surrounding hid,? and K, is a numerical constant. Consideration of Newton’s 
Second bw of Motion shows that, since the static pressure of the flow is uniform, 
M must have a value which is independent of x; it is most easily evaluatd at the 
orifice, where the fluid haa the uniform velocity u,, from 
(3) 
Here do is the orifice diameter and po the density of the injected fluid. 
The numeriwl magnitude of R, can only be determined, in the present state 
of turbulence theory, by experimental means. Similarly, only experiment can 
show how equation (2) must be modified when the jet density is rendered non- 
uniform by a chemical reaction in the jet, or by the existence of a difference of 
value between po and the density of the surrounding fluid, p,. 
M = 4 = )dipoui. 
Previoufl work 
Numerous measurements have been made of the axial-velocity profiles, u(y), 
in isothermal air jets (see, for example, the bibliography compiled by Krzy- 
woblocki 1956). These data may be inserted in equation (l), from which the mms 
flow rate m can then be evaluated by numerical quadrature; this has been done 
by Grimmett (1948), Polomik (1948) and Voorheis & Howe (1939). 
Many authors have avoided the numerical quadrature by assuming that the 
u(y) profile has one of the forms which permit analytical integration; the velocity 
and radius sdea appropriate to a given section are then determined from, say, 
the measured velocity on the axis, and the radius at which the measured velocity 
has half this value. The resulting values for m then depend to some extent on the 
profile-shape amumed. 
Values for K, obtained in this way for isothermal air jets range from about 
0-22 up to 0.404, according to the investigator. The highest value, due to Schlicht- 
ing (1965), is obtained by fitting to the experimental data of Reichardt (1942) 
a particularly full-skirted ‘theoretical’ curve. 
The reasons for the present uncertainty about the value of K, me of several 
kinds. They include the following: 
(i) It is diffioult to measure @ at large values of y where the velocities are 
small and the flow may be intermittent; the presence of y aa a multiplier of u in 
equation (1) augments the influence of inaccuracies in this region. 
(ii) The above difficulty is avoided if an analytical form is chosen for the 
velocity profile. This choice, on the other hand, entails uncertainty m to what is 
t The eubecripta to p in equatiomi (2) and (3) are not needed in the present discussion, 
which preeumes that p ie uniform throughout; they are nevertheless inserted for use later 
in the paper. 

===== PAGE 3 =====
Entrainment by misymmetrical turbulent jets 23 
the ‘best ’ profile. Small differences in profile height at large y can greatly affect 
the value of m which is deduced. 
(iii) Whichever of the above procedures is used, it is desirable that x should 
be many tihes greater than do. Since the dynamic head at a Pitot tube in the jet 
is propokional to (do/x)2, limitations on manometer sensitivity make it dificult 
to work at axial distances much greater than five times the length of the potential 
core. 
Outline of the present contribution 
The above remarks show that a new method of measuring m is required, even 
for uniform-density flows. When jets with non-uniform density are to be studied, 
the case for a new method is stronger still; for a recourse to equation (1) would 
now necessitate measurement of a density profile as well as one of velocity, and 
would raise questions as to the relation of pU to the measured jj and 9. 
The present paper reports a new experimental method which is not open to 
the objections mentioned above: m is measured more directly and simply; no 
integration is required. This technique is described in 5 2 below. 
The results of the study are presented in 5 3 and figures 4,5 and 7. Summarized 
briefly, they are: that K, is equal to 0.282; that equation (2) holds for non- 
uniform density without modification provided that buoyancy effects are 
negligible; and that the presence of combustion reduces K,. The role of buoyancy 
is not so easily summarized; it is discussed in $4. 
2. Apparatus The principle of the method 
In the ideal free jet which is under consideration, the surrounding reservoir is 
large and, except in the vicinity of the jet axis, at uniform pressure; the entrained 
fluid flows radially inward towards the jet axis. If, however, a turbulent jet is 
partially enclosed by cylindrical walls, the radial inflow is impeded; the fluid 
entrained by the enclosed part of the jet has to flow axially in the annular space 
between the cylindrical wall and the conical ‘ boundary’ of jet; the corresponding 
axial pressure gradients can be measured. 
Now let us suppose that the cylindrical wall is made porous, and that a con- 
trolled and measured amount of fluid can be mused to flow through it in a radially 
inward direction. Then, if this flow is equal in quantity to that which would have 
passed through the area occupied by the wall if the wall had been absent, the 
axid pressure gradients referred to in the last paragraph will disappear. 
This recognition underlies the experimental method which has been used: 
the flow rate through the porous wall is varied until no axial pressure gradients 
can be detectid; this flow rate is then measured and presumed to be equal to 
tht which would be entrained if the jet were unenclosed. 
Details of the apparatus 
Figure 1 shows the porous-walled chambers which were used. The axis of the 
jet is coincident with the axis of the cylindrical porous wall. The base of the 
oylinder waa completely closed, apart from the orifice from which the jet origin- 

===== PAGE 4 =====
24 F. P. Ricou and D. B. #palding 
aM, and the upper end of the resulting chamber waa partially closed; these 
measures had the effect of augmenting the axial pressure gradients which pre- 
vailed when the flow through the porous wall waa not 'right', while in no way 
interfering with the radially inward flow to the jet when it waa entraining under 
free-jet conditions. 
The porous cylinders were built up of fine-grade filter cloth on a rigid frame- 
work. A Roots-type blower was used to supply the entrainable air; this permitted 
the use of an appreciable pressure drop (up to 5in. of water) across the porous 
cylinder and helped to ensure uniformity of inflow. Calibrated orifice plates were 
I 
Porous wall 
Orifice 
I\ 
I \I 
- -el/ 
19; in. diameter 
plates 
Extension to no. 2 chamber 
2 chamber 
FIQWBE 1. (a) Leading dimensions of three chambere. 
(b) Dimensions of extension to no. 2 chamber. 
Entrainment chamber 
No. 1 2 3 
Hin. 8.7 13 3 
D in. 6.8 8.9 8.9 
used to meamre the rate of supply of this air. The orifices used were of rounded 
profle, designed according to B.S.1042. Their diameters (do) ranged from 
0-0625in. to 1-25in. The corresponding range of dimensionless axial distances 
(%/do) over which measurements could be made was from 418 to 2.4. 
The axial pmsure difference which waa measured was that across the outlet 
aperture; since the pressure variations within the chamber were small, this 
difference can be thought of aa that between the pressure in the chrtmber and 
the pressure of the atmosphere. The micromanometer used waa of the direct- 
reading type developed by Spalding (1950). 

===== PAGE 5 =====
Entrainment by axisymmetrical turbulent jets 25 
Preliminary tests: the choice of aperture size 
The size of the aperture in the mask at the upper end of the 'entrainment 
ahamber' had to be chosen with care. On the one hand, it was-desired that the 
hole should be smell, since this led to an easily detected pressure difference, when 
the flow through the porous wall was not properly matched to the free-jet require- 
mente; however, if the hole were made too small, the mask would interfere 
with the axial flow in the jet itself. 
h 
N aJ .la 
a3 
B 
Q+ 0 
A - 41" 
t -up 
0 - 26' 
0 - 17" I 
0.004.- 
0002 - 
I I 
2 4 0 
-ow - 
-0004 - 
-0a06 - 
FIQIJRE 2. Variation of chamber pressure with flow rate through porous wall, for various 
apertures. Nozzle, 0.6 in. diameter; x/d, = 25.6; uo = 112 ft./eec. (No. 2 chamber.) 
Figure 2 shows the results of preliminary tests leading to the choice of aperture 
size, the latter being expressed in terms of the angle 0 subtended by a diameter 
of the aperture at the centre of the base of the chamber. The ordinate is the 
excess pressure in the chamber; the abscissa is the ratio of the mass of air flowing 
through the porous wall, m,, to the mass of gas (air) injected through the orifice, 
m,; m,, and the orifice diameter, do, have the same values throughout; each curve 
is drawn for a different value of aperture angle 0. 
Inspection of figure 2 confirms that the smaller 0 is the more steeply the 
exceas pressure varies with variations of m,; it also confirms that the aperture 
size influences the value of ml/mo which gives zero excess pressure, if0 is too small. 
The latter influence is slight if 0 is 30' or more; thus figure 2 shows that the value 

===== PAGE 6 =====
26 El I? Ricou and D. B. Spalding 
of mJm0 corresponding to free-jet conditions for the situation in question can be 
taken as 7.0. These tests led to the choice of 30° for the aperture angle in all the 
tests reported below. 
Preliminary tests: the effect of the ReynoldP number 
Teats were carried out, using air as the injected fluid, to establish the value of 
the Reynolds number above which equation (2) waa valid. Some of the data. 
are recorded in figure 3 in the form of plots of ml/mo versm the Reynolds number. 
The latter quantity is defined by 
R = Pouodo/,uoY (4) 
where ,uo is the viscosity of the injected gas. From now onwards, m, will be used 
aa signifying that value of the air flow rate through the porous wall which causes 
10 
8 
6 
f = 
4 
L 
2 
0 
-k 
I I I I I I I I 
1 2 3 4 5 6 I 8 
Reynolds number x lo-' 
FIGURE 3. Variation of entrainment rate with the Reynolds number. (a) No. 2 chamber. 
Nozzle, 0.5 in. diameter; x/do = 25.6. (b) No. 1 chamber. Nozzle, 0.625 in. diameter; 
xldo = 13.7. 
axial pressure gradients to disappear; m, is therefore connected with m, the maas 
flow rate in a fiee jet of length equal to the length of the entrainment chamber, by 
m = m,+m,. (5) 
The tests of figure 3 were carried out by varying the injection flow rate, and 
so the Reynolds number, and then meesuring the corresponding w. Evidently, 
the ratio mJmo was approximately constant for Reynolds numbers in excess 
of 2-5 x 104. All test data appea,ring in the remainder of the paper can be taken 
as pertaining to Reynolds numbers greater than this value, except for those 
in which the injected fluid is hydrogen. 

===== PAGE 7 =====
Entrainment by axkymmetrical turbuknt jets 27 
3. Experimental results 
Air into air: hotherma1 
Experiments were made with various combinations of chamber length x and 
nozzle diameter do, when the injected gaa was air at the same temperature aa 
the sir supplied through the porous wall. The results are represented by the points 
in figure 4 clustered near the straight line marked (a); this line may be represented 
by the formula 
200 
100 
., 0 0 
m 2 
- = 0.32 -. 
d0 
+- 
yr- . 
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 
I 1 I I I I 
XI4 
FIQURE 4. Variation of entrainment rate with axial distance for isothermal jete. Experi- 
mental results: (a) 0, air into air; (b) +, propane and carbon dioxide into air; 
(c) 0, hydrogen into air; (A, entrainment chamber inverted). 
Heavy gas into air: isothed 
Corresponding measurements were made when the injeoted fluid waa carbon 
dioxide or propane, two gmes with equal densities, the temperatures being equal 
to that of the air supplied through the porous cylinder. The results are shown in 
figure 4 &B a series of points clustered near the straight line marked (b): thie line 
can be rep-nted by the formula 
Although flammable, the propane waa not ignited in the experiments referred 
to here. 
Light gas into air: i80them~d 
Figure 4 ah contains results obtained by similar experiments in which hydrogen 
was the injected gaa; the hydrogen jet waa not ignited. The results are represented 
by the pointe near the straight line (c), the formula for which is 

===== PAGE 8 =====
28 F. €? Rh and D. B. SpaJding 
Since buoyancy wa~ thought to affect the hydrogen jets, some experiments were 
carried out with the entrainment chamber inverted; it is seen that this inversion 
had an effect. 
The high viscosity of hydrogen, and other limitations, prevented the per- 
formance of teats at Reynolds numbers in exceas of 17,500. 
Fuels into gas: conbustion 
Measurements were also made of the entrainment rate which prevailed when 
the fuel gases in the jet (propane and hydrogen) were ignited; in some cmea 
both air and fuel were injected through the orifice simultaneously. The results 
of these tests, which showed a considerable effect of buoyancy, will be introduced 
in figure 7 below. 
4. Discussion of results 
Jet8 of uniform density 
The equations (6), (7) and (8) may be cast in the form of equation (2) by introduc- 
tion of equation (3) for the excess momentum flux and of a corresponding equation 
for the injected maas flux, m,, namely 
m, = and; pouw (9 1 
Equations (6), (7) and (8) then lead respectively to 
m -- 0*32(4n)* = 0.283, 
xM*ppf - 
m -- - 0.26(17~)* ($$)* = 0.284, 
XM*P# 
z@= 
m 1*2(&)4 (A)* = 0.279, 
wherein (s) and (A) represent the density ratio po/pI for the respective caaes 
of propane or carbon dioxide, and hydrogen. 
Comparison of equations (lo), (1 1) and (12) led to the conclusion that equa- 
tion (2) is valid, within the experimental error, for all the experimental results 
cited so far, if K, is given the value 0.282. 
The same conclusion can be expressed differently by noting tbt all the data 
can be held to obey the relation 
m 
This is illustrated by figure 5, which contains the data of figure 4 replotted in 
the manner indicated by equation (13). 
The efsect of buoyancy: theory 
When the density of the fluid in the jet differs from that of the surrounding air, 
hydrostatic forces cause the excess momentum flux to increase with z (ttssuming 
that the jet fluid is the lighter and that the flow direction is upward). Con- 
sequently equation (2) no longer correctly expresses the variation of m with 2. 

===== PAGE 9 =====
Entrainment by misymmetrical turbulent jet% 29 
Dimensional analysis indicates that, when x becomes very large, m is pro- 
portional to xt (Batchelor 1964); for this to hold, however, the excess momentum 
flux of the jet, M, must greatly exceed the value of Mo defined by equation (3). 
How should m vary with x when M and Mo are of the -me order? 
A tentative answer to this question may be obtained by supposing that the 
local rate of entrainment is uniquely related to the local excess momentum flux 
in accordance with the differential equation 
\ e 
t 
FIQURE 5. Entrainment rate for ieothermal jete. Experimental results: (a) 0, air into air; 
(a) + , propane and carbon dioxide into air; (c), 0, hydrogen into air; ( A, entrainment 
chamber inverted). 
An assumption of this character has been made by Morton, Taylor & Turner 
(1950), and other authom, in connexion with the rise of turbulent plumes in the 
atmosphere. 
In an unpublished study, one of the present authors has investigated the 
implications of equation (14), when combined with the assumptions: (i) that the 
velocity and temperature profiles are Gaussian, (ii) that the ratio of the widths 
of the temperature and velocity profiles is equal to 1.17 for all x, (iii) that chemical 
reaction is confined to regions of the jet which are much closer to the orifice than 
is the section 5. The results of this study are represented by the curve of figure 6; 
the ordinate and abscissa quantities of this graph are self-explanatory apart 
from the Froude number, P, which is defined by: 
in the absence of chemical reaction, 

===== PAGE 10 =====
30 F. €! Ricou and D. B. Spa2ding 
or, when chemical reaotion occurs, 
10 
* 
rc, 
h 
1.0- 
E - 
c1 Tl 
Here the symbols signify: 
- 
C 
T 
h 
9 
mfu 
H 
specific heat of gas at constant pressure, 
absolute temperature of air, 
enthlpy , 
gravitational acceleration, 
maw fraction of fuel in injected gas, 
heat of combustion of fuel, 
and subscripte 0 and 1 refer, aa before, to the injected fluid and to the sur- 
rounding air reapectively. 
/ 
Asymptote for pure 
F natural convection 
I I 
10 100 
,/, / 
0.1 1.0 
k)’ F-t 
FIGURE 6. Theoretical prediction of entrainment in buoyent jets. 
The effect of buoyancy: experiment 
Figure 7 presents the data of figure 4 (upward flow only) together with the result% 
of measurements made with burning jete. Also drawn for comparison is the curve 
of figure 6. The following features are evident. 
(i) The data points lie close to the curve in the forced-convection rCgime; 
this, of course, is to be expected from figure 5, for example. 
(ii) The iduencs of increasing buoyancy predicted by the theoretical curve, 
viz. an increased slope in the upper right corner, is exhibited by the experimental 
data. It is chiefly the hydrogen diffusion-flame data which are in question here. 
(iii) Some of the data points, particularly those for premixed hydrogen-air 
jets, lie well below both the curve and its forced-convection aaymptote. 
(iv) The scatter is considerable. 

===== PAGE 11 =====
Entrainment by aximjmmetrical turbulent jets 31 
Cornprison with previoue work 
It has already been stated that, in the absence of buoyancy, K, has been found by 
previous authors to lie between 0.22 and 0.404; the value obtained from the 
praeent work, viz. 0.282, can therefore be said to lie near the middle of the range 
ofearlier values. The ease with which the mwurements were made, in the present 
FIOIJRE 7. Entrainment by buoyant jete and flames. + , Unburnt propane jet; , un- 
burnt hydrogen jet; 0, pre-mixed air-hydrogen flame; A, hydrogen diffueion flame; 
0, propane Musion flame. 
investigation, together with the straightforwardness of their interpretation, leads 
w to believe that the present value of K, is the most reliable established so far. 
The finding that equation (2) holds, in the absence of buoyancy effects, for jets 
of non-uniform density was expected; it accords with the surmise of Squire & 
Trouncer (1944), and with the suggeetion of Thring & Newby (1953), that the 
oharacteriatic length of a turbulent jet is not do but do(p,,/pl)*. 
Other authors who have presented experimental dab for the natural convec- 
tion &@me include Yih (1961), and Cleeves & Boelter (1947); the data of these 
outhore are represented on fig... 7 by broken straight lines which have been 

===== PAGE 12 =====
32 F. €? Ricou and D. B. Spalding 
plotted by ignoring experimental scatter and assuming Gaussian velocity and 
temperature profiles. 
The data of Yih agree fairly well with the present hydrogen diffusion-flame 
data; both sets lie appreciably above the theoretical curve, indicating that the 
entrainment rate is greater in a buoyant jet than a non-buoyant one of the same 
excess momentum. The data of Cleeves & Boelter show the same tendency to an 
even more marked degree; they are, however, probably the leaat reliable of the 
data on figure 7, being appreciably influenced by potential-core effects. 
5. Conclusions 
(a) The new experimental technique for measuring the rate of entrainment by 
a turbulent jet was found to be easy to use, and to be applicable to jets of non- 
uniform density and to larger values of z/d, than had previously been in- 
vestigated. 
(b) The constant K, of equation (2) was found to have the value 0.282, irrespec- 
tive of the density ratio. 
(c) The curve of figure 6, based on the entrainment assumption expressed by 
equation (14), represents approximately the influence of buoyancy on the entrain- 
ment. However, it must be noted that: (i) there is a tendency for the curve to 
predict too low an entrainment rate in the natural-convection rkgime; (ii) the 
curve predicts too high an entrainment rate for some flames; (iii) the experi- 
mental scatter of the results of the present and earlier work in the natural- 
convection regime precludes the drawing of firm conclusions at present. 
One of the authors (F. P. R.) acknowledges the financial support of the States 
of Jersey Committee of Education, and of Thomils Hedley and Company, Ltd. 
This research was supported by a contract between Imperial College and the 
National Engineering Laboratory; the Director of the N.E.L. has given his 
permission for publication. 
REFERENCES 
BATCHELOR, G. K. 1954 Quart. J. Roy. Met. Soc. 80, 339. 
CLEEVES, V. & BOELTER, L. M. K. 1947 Chem. Engng Progr. 43, 123. 
GRI~TT, H. L. 1948 M.S. Thesis, University of Illinois. 
KRZYWOBLOCKI, M. Z. 1956 Jet Prop. 26, 760. 
MORTON, B. R., TAYLOR, G. I. & TURNER, J. S. 1950 Proc. Roy. Soc. A, 234, 1. 
Par, S. I. 1954 Flus DynumiCe of Jets. New York: Van Noetrand. 
POLO~E, E. E. 1948 M.S. Thesis, University of Illinois. 
REICEARDT, H. 1942 V.D.1.-Fw8chungsheft. p. 414. (2nd ed. 1951). 
SCHLICHTIN~, H. 1955 Boundary Layer Theory. London: Pergamon Prees. 
SPALDINQ, D. B. 1960 J. Sci. Inatrum. 27, 310. 
SQUIRE, H. B. & TROUNCER, J. 1944 Round jets in a general stream. Aero. Res. Cwm. 
Tech. Rep. R. &. M. no. 1974. 
THRINQ, M. W. & NEWBY. M. P. 1963 Fourth Syqoeium on Co?nbu&h, p. 789. Balti- 
more: Williams and Wilkins. 
VOORHEIS, T. S. & HOW, E. D. 1939 Proc. Pac. Coaet Gas Ass. 30, 198. 
YIH, C. S. 1951 Proc. First U.S. Nat. Congt.. Awl. Me&. p. 941. 